PEP: 755
Title: Status quo of the build system as of CPython 3.12
Author: Erlend Egeberg Aasland <erlend@python.org>, Zachary Ware <zachary.ware@gmail.com>
Status: Draft
Type: Informational
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 04-Oct-2023
Python-Version: 3.12


Abstract
========

This PEP describes the CPython 3.12 build system,
and presents the result of two informal Discourse polls:

- `What do you want to see in tomorrow's CPython build system?
  <https://discuss.python.org/t/what-do-you-want-to-see-in-tomorrow-s-cpython-build-system/28197>`__
- `What do you consider pain points of today's build system?
  <https://discuss.python.org/t/what-do-you-consider-pain-points-of-todays-build-system/31815>`__


Rationale
=========

The current build system has been criticized by contributors and core developers,
and the idea of replacing it surfaces every now and then.
If we are to make large scale changes to the current build system,
we need to know more about its pros and cons.

This PEP intends to document the current build system;
how is it perceived by contributors and core developers,
and what kind of build system they envision in the future.

This PEP can be used as input to decide whether to improve the existing build system,
rewrite the existing build system,
or implement a completely new build system.


Poll Results
============

`June 20, 2023
<https://discuss.python.org/t/what-do-you-want-to-see-in-tomorrow-s-cpython-build-system/28197>`__,
we asked:

   Hypothetically, if we had to recreate the build process from just the available code today, which qualities and features would we want to see in tomorrow’s new build system?

`August 17, 2023
<https://discuss.python.org/t/what-do-you-consider-pain-points-of-todays-build-system/31815>`__,
we asked:

   [...] what do you consider pain points of todays build system?

The desire of a unified build system was mentioned several times.
This need was accompanied by the pain point that we currently have _three_ build systems:

1. A Windows build system
2. The GNU Autoconf/Make build system
3. The docs build system

It is hard to keep the Windows and \*nix build systems in sync.
Windows developers often find the GNU build system incomprehensible;
\*nix developers find the Windows build system incomprehensible.
Many developers simply avoid the build system completely.

Also mentioned multiple times, was the desire of correct incremental builds.
This need was accompanied by the observation that today's build system does _not_ guarantee this.
Related, was the desire of fast incremental builds and deterministic builds.
The latter is not guaranteed by the current build system.
Deterministic builds imply the ability to easily constrain dependencies,
a need that was also mentioned.

Several people also mentioned the desire to support specific use cases, such as cross-compilation support,
being easily reusable and extendable by 3rd parties who build from source,
and being able to produce an installed-shape layout.

Ease of maintenance and supporting all PEP-11 platforms was also mentioned as end goals.

Some particular pain points was mentioned:

* the configure step is slow and full of serialized checks
* configure is re-run seemingly at random
* generated files must be updated manually
* some code generation scripts in ``Tools/`` duplicate data defined in the stdlib

The current build system contains decades of cruft that may or may not still be relevant to anyone.

Last, we want a build system where developers and contributors are comfortable with making and reviewing changes to it,
in years to come.
This implies some needs:

* good quality documentation
* support, for example in form of an active community
* a build system that is being actively developed


The Current Build System
========================

GNU Autoconf and Make
---------------------

:file:`Makefile.pre.in` and :file:`configure.ac` make up most of the GNU Autoconf/Make build system.
GNU Autoconf is based on the M4 macro language;
it takes care of the configure step,
which implies detecting 3rd party dependencies,
compiler and linker traits, platform specifics, etc.
It also provides a command-line interface so the user can enable and disable various features.

At the end of the configure step, the :file:`pyconfig.h` header file and the Makefile is generated.
The Makefile file contains a set of hand-written targets and build dependencies,
and takes care of the build and test use cases.
Keeping the Makefile compatible with both BSD and GNU Make is a pain point.

Few developers, core devs included, have deep M4 and GNU Autoconf knowledge,
and it is hard to find contributors and new core developers with these skills.
Also, GNU Autoconf seems to me a fragile project;
there are no regular releases, and it has few active core developers.


The Windows Build System
------------------------

The Windows build consists of a collection of .xml and .bat files that was generated using VSCode many years ago,
and is now manually updated whenever needed.

*TODO: write more stuff here*


The ``Docs/`` Build
-------------------

*TODO: write something here*


Use Cases
=========

The most common use case is the one performed by the CI:

1. configure
2. build
3. test

We want the CI as fast as possible, so it is imperative,
as mentioned in the poll responses, that the build system is fast.
Currently, the CI is implemented using GitHub Actions,
so for convenience, the build system should be supported by all GitHub runners.

For core developers, a common use cases are _reconfigure_ and _rebuild_;
this was reflected in the poll responses: we want fast and correct incremental builds.


Build Issues in the Bug Tracker
===============================

As of 2023-10-04, there are 266 open and 3566 closed issues with the ``build`` label on our bug tracker.
Of these, 69 open and 324 closed issues are marked as feature requests,
and 76 open and 467 closed issues are marked as bugs.
Grouping by platform, 31 open and 368 closed are Windows specific issues;
19 open and 204 closed are macOS specific issues.


Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Large scale changes to the build system, either by rewriting parts of it,
or completely reimplementing it has several backwards compatibility issues.
Minor changes in dependency detection for extension modules is expected.
A new build system may impose new bootstrapping needs;
this will affect how easy it will be to port Python to new architectures and platforms.

Good documentation will help mitigate issues that arise.

*PERHAPS THIS SECTION BELONGS TO THE FOLLOW-UP PEP, INSTEAD OF HERE*


Copyright
=========

This document is placed in the public domain or under the
CC0-1.0-Universal license, whichever is more permissive.


..
    Local Variables:
    mode: indented-text
    indent-tabs-mode: nil
    sentence-end-double-space: t
    fill-column: 70
    coding: utf-8
    End:
